Arm64: Implement region write barriers (#111636)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/coreclr/jit/GC-write-barriers.md

        // Bitwise write barriers only
        if g_region_use_bitwise_write_barrier:

            char *card_table_dst = (dst >> 11) + g_card_table
            char dst_bit = 1 << (dst >> 8 && 7)

            // Check if we need to update the card table
            if *card_table_dst & dst_bit == 0:
                return
            
            // Atomically update the card table
            lock: *card_table_dst |= dst_bit

            goto CardBundle

    // Check if we need to update the card table
    char *card_table_dst = (dst >> 11) + g_card_table
    if *card_table_dst == 0xff:
        return

    // Update the card table
    *card_table_dst = 0xff

CardBundle:

    // Mark the card bundle table as dirty
    Ifdef FEATURE_MANUALLY_MANAGED_CARD_BUNDLES:
        char card_bundle_dst = (dst >> 21) + g_card_bundle_table
        if *card_bundle_dst != 0xff:
            *card_bundle_dst = 0xff

````

The Checked Write Barrier has additional checks:

````
JIT_CheckedWriteBarrier(Object **dst, Object *ref)

    // Return if the destination is not on the heap
    if ref < g_lowest_address || ref >= g_highest_address:
        return

    return JIT_WriteBarrier(dst, ref)
````

> ## WritebarrierManager
> 
> On AMD64 and Arm64, there several different implementations of the write barrier function. Each version is a subset of the `JIT_WriteBarrier` above, assuming different state, meaning most `if` checks can be skipped. The actual write barrier that is called is a copy of one of these implementations.
> 
> The WritebarrierManager keeps track of which implementation is currently being used. As internal state changes, the WritebarrierManager updates the copy to the correct implementation. In practice, most of the internal state is fixed on startup, with only changes to/from use of write watch barriers changing during runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## WriteBarrierManager

On AMD64 and Arm64, there several different implementations of the write barrier function. Each version is a subset of the `JIT_WriteBarrier` above, assuming different state, meaning most `if` checks can be skipped. The actual write barrier that is called is a copy of one of these implementations.

The WriteBarrierManager keeps track of which implementation is currently being used. As internal state changes, the WriteBarrierManager updates the copy to the correct implementation. In practice, most of the internal state is fixed on startup, with only changes to/from use of write watch barriers changing during runtime.
```
Match the casing in code

# GC write barriers

The GC write barrier function (JIT_WriteBarrier) is generally the hottest function in CoreCLR and is written in assembly. The full pseudo code for the function is as follows:

````
JIT_WriteBarrier(Object **dst, Object *ref)
    Set *dst = ref

    // Shadow Heap update:

>     ifdef TARGET_ARM64:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ifdef WRITE_BARRIER_CHECK:
```

>         if *wbs_GCShadow != 0:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        if *g_GCShadow != 0:
```
There is a mix of the wbs_ prefixes used as the local name in Arm64-specific implementation and g_ prefixes that are the global variables used throughout the runtime. I think this pseudo code should use the global variable names.

            if g_GCShadow + (dst - g_lowest_address) < wbs_GCShadowEnd:
                *(g_GCShadow + (dst - g_lowest_address) = ref
                if *dst != ref:
                    *(g_GCShadow + (dst - g_lowest_address) = INVALIDGCVALUE

    // Write watch for GC Heap:
    ifdef FEATURE_USE_SOFTWARE_WRITE_WATCH_FOR_GC_HEAP:
        if g_sw_ww_table != 0:
            if *(g_sw_ww_table + (dst>>11)) != 0:
                *(g_sw_ww_table + (dst>>11)) =  0xff

>     // Return if the reference is not in the heap

Reviewer: I do not think that this is correct. This checks whether reference is not in ephemeral generation (ie Gen 0).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps, worth mentioning then that there is a Checked version of the same barrier with "Is not on heap" checks

Author: Fixed the doc, including adding `JIT_CheckedWriteBarrier()` pseudo code.

>     if ref < g_ephemeral_low || reg >= g_ephemeral_high:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if ref < g_ephemeral_low || ref >= g_ephemeral_high:
```

# GC write barriers

The GC write barrier function (JIT_WriteBarrier) is generally the hottest function in CoreCLR and is written in assembly. The full pseudo code for the function is as follows:

````
JIT_WriteBarrier(Object **dst, Object *ref)
    Set *dst = ref

    // Shadow Heap update
    ifdef WRITE_BARRIER_CHECK:
        if g_GCShadow != 0:
            long *shadow_dst = g_GCShadow + (dst - g_lowest_address)
            // Check shadow heap location is within shadow heap
            if shadow_dst < g_GCShadowEnd:
                *shadow_dst = ref
                atomic: wait for stores to complete
                if *dst != ref:
                    *shadow_dst = INVALIDGCVALUE

    // Update the write watch table, if it's in use
    ifdef FEATURE_USE_SOFTWARE_WRITE_WATCH_FOR_GC_HEAP:
        if g_sw_ww_table != 0:
            char *ww_table_dst = g_sw_ww_table + (dst>>11)
            if *ww_table_dst != 0:
                *ww_table_dst =  0xff

>     // Return if the reference is not in Gen 0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Return if the reference is not in ephemeral generations
```

    if ref < g_ephemeral_low || ref >= g_ephemeral_high:
        return

    // Region Checks
    if g_region_to_generation_table != 0:

>         // Calculate region locations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        // Calculate region generations
```

        char reg_loc_dst = *((dst >> g_region_shr) + g_region_to_generation_table)
        char reg_loc_ref = *((ref >> g_region_shr) + g_region_to_generation_table)

        // Return if the region we're storing into is Gen 0
        if reg_loc_dst == 0:
            return

>         // Check this is going from old to young
>         if reg_loc_dst >= reg_loc_ref:
>             return

Reviewer 4: Can we double check the comparsion direction here? I think the correct direction should be reversed.

```suggestion
        // Return if the new reference is not from old to young
        if reg_loc_ref >= reg_loc_dst:
            return
```

Author: > Can we double check the comparsion direction here? I think the correct direction should be reversed.

Yes, your version is correct. Fixed and updated in assembly files too.

Author: The assembly code matches the comments :)

Reviewer 4: Am I reading your code wrong?

```                                                                                   #
// Calculate region generations                                                       #
ldr  x17, JIT_WriteBarrier_Offset_RegionToGeneration + FIXUP_LABEL(\start)            #
ldr  w12, JIT_WriteBarrier_Offset_RegionShr + FIXUP_LABEL(\start)                     #
lsr  x15, x15, x12                                                                    #
add  x15, x15, x17 // x15 = (RHS >> wbs_region_shr) + wbs_region_to_generation_table  # x15 is address of region # of RHS <--------+
lsr  x12, x14, x12                                                                    #                                            |
add  x12, x12, x17 // x12 = (LHS >> wbs_region_shr) + wbs_region_to_generation_table  # x12 is address of region # of LHS <----+   |
                                                                                      #                                        |   |
// Check whether the region we are storing into is gen 0 - nothing to do in this case #                                        |   |
ldrb w12, [x12]                                                                       # w12 is region # of LHS because --------+   |
cbz  w12, LOCAL_LABEL(\exit)                                                          #                                            |
                                                                                      #                                            |
// Return if the new reference is not from old to young                               #                                            |
ldrb w15, [x15]                                                                       # w15 is region # of RHS because ------------+
                                                                                      #
cmp  w15, w12                                                                         # if region # of RHS >= region # of LHS, exit 
                                                                                      # 
                                                                                      #     which is the same as 
                                                                                      #
                                                                                      # if the new reference from old (RHS, larger gen) to young (LHS, smaller gen number), exit
                                                                                      # 
                                                                                      #     but that's the reverse of the comment
                                                                                      #
bhs  LOCAL_LABEL(\exit)                                                               # 
```                                                                                   #

    return JIT_WriteBarrier(dst, ref)
````

## WritebarrierManager

On AMD64 and Arm64, there several different implementations of the write barrier function. Each version is a subset of the `JIT_WriteBarrier` above, assuming different state, meaning most `if` checks can be skipped. The actual write barrier that is called is a copy of one of these implementations.

The WritebarrierManager keeps track of which implementation is currently being used. As internal state changes, the WritebarrierManager updates the copy to the correct implementation. In practice, most of the internal state is fixed on startup, with only changes to/from use of write watch barriers changing during runtime.

`WRITE_BARRIER_CHECK` is only set in `DEBUG` mode. On Arm64 `WRITE_BARRIER_CHECK` checks exist at the top of each version of the function when `DEBUG` mode is enabled. On `Amd64` these checks do not exist. Instead, a special `JIT_WriteBarrier_Debug` version of the function exists, which contains most of the functionality of `JIT_WriteBarrier` pseudo code and is used exclusively when `DEBUG` mode is enabled.

> On Arm64, g_region_use_bitwise_write_barrier is only set if LSE atomics are present on the hardware, as only LSE provides an single instruction to atomically update a byte via a bitwise OR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Arm64, g_region_use_bitwise_write_barrier is only set if LSE atomics are present on the hardware, as only LSE provides a single instruction to atomically update a byte via a bitwise OR.
```
